Therapist: Hello, how have you been feeling since our last session?

Patient: Not great, to be honest. I've been really struggling to get out of bed in the mornings. Sometimes I just lie there for hours, not seeing the point in starting the day.

Therapist: I'm sorry to hear that. Can you tell me more about what you're experiencing?

Patient: It's like everything takes so much effort. Even simple things like showering or making food just seem overwhelming. I've been skipping meals because I don't have the energy to cook, and sometimes I don't even feel hungry.

Therapist: How has your sleep been?

Patient: Terrible. I fall asleep okay, but then I wake up at 3 or 4 AM and just lie there with all these negative thoughts swirling in my head. I keep thinking about all the ways I've disappointed people or messed things up.

Therapist: And how would you describe your mood throughout the day?

Patient: Just... empty, most of the time. Sometimes I get these waves of sadness that come out of nowhere. I was at the store yesterday and suddenly felt like crying for no reason. I had to leave my cart and just go sit in my car for a while.

Therapist: Have you been able to enjoy any activities that you normally find pleasurable?

Patient: Not really. I used to love painting and reading, but I haven't touched my brushes in weeks. I try to read but can't focus on the words. My friends invited me to a movie last weekend, but I made up an excuse not to go. I just don't have the energy to socialize or pretend that I'm okay.

Therapist: How are you feeling about yourself these days?

Patient: Like a failure, mostly. I keep thinking about all the things I should be doing better. My apartment is a mess, I'm behind on projects at work, and I feel like I'm letting everyone down. Sometimes I think people would be better off if I wasn't around.

Therapist: When you say people would be better off if you weren't around, can you tell me more about those thoughts?

Patient: It's not that I have a plan or anything. I just sometimes think the world wouldn't miss me if I was gone. I feel like a burden to everyone.

Therapist: Have you been having any thoughts about harming yourself?

Patient: Not actively. But sometimes I think it would be easier if I just didn't wake up. I wouldn't do anything about it though.

Therapist: Thank you for sharing that with me. How have you been coping with these feelings?

Patient: I've been trying to use some of the breathing techniques we talked about. They help a little in the moment, but then the feelings come back. Mostly I just try to distract myself with TV, but I can't even focus on that for long.

Therapist: And how is your anxiety? Last time we talked, you mentioned feeling anxious in social situations.

Patient: The anxiety is still there, but honestly, the sadness and emptiness are overwhelming it. I'm not really going to social events anyway, so I haven't had to deal with it as much. Though I did have a panic attack before a team meeting at work last week. My heart was racing and I felt like I couldn't breathe. I had to go to the bathroom and use those grounding techniques we talked about.

Therapist: How about your concentration and ability to focus?

Patient: It's been pretty bad. At work, I find myself staring at my computer screen for long periods without actually doing anything. I have to read the same paragraph multiple times because I can't focus on what I'm reading. My boss noticed and asked if everything was okay.

Therapist: What did you tell them?

Patient: Just that I've been having some personal issues. I don't want them to know about all this. I'm afraid they'll think I can't handle my job.

Therapist: Is there anything you've found that helps, even if just a little bit?

Patient: Taking walks sometimes helps clear my head momentarily. And my cat. When she curls up next to me, it gives me a reason to stay in the moment, at least for a little while.

Therapist: Those are good coping mechanisms. Let's talk more about expanding on those strategies and addressing some of these symptoms you've been experiencing...