Therapist: Thanks for coming in today. How have things been going since our last session?

Patient: It's been a tough week. I had promised myself I'd cut back, but then we had this work event on Tuesday, and I ended up drinking way more than I planned.

Therapist: Can you tell me more about what happened at the work event?

Patient: It was supposed to be just a team happy hour. I told myself I'd have one beer and leave early. But then people kept buying rounds, and I didn't want to seem antisocial. Before I knew it, I'd had six or seven drinks. I barely remember getting home.

Therapist: How did you feel the next day?

Patient: Terrible hangover, of course. I was late to work, couldn't concentrate, and my boss definitely noticed. But the worst part was the guilt. I had really promised myself I would moderate this time.

Therapist: You mentioned wanting to cut back. What's motivating that desire?

Patient: Honestly, I'm starting to see how it's affecting different parts of my life. My partner has been making comments about how much I drink. We got into a big fight last weekend when I came home drunk after saying I was just going out for one or two with friends. And I've noticed my tolerance increasing - it takes more and more to get the same effect.

Therapist: Besides alcohol, have you been using any other substances?

Patient: Well, I've been smoking more weed than usual. It helps me relax after a stressful day, and I tell myself it's better than drinking. But instead of replacing drinking, I'm kind of doing both now. And occasionally, maybe once or twice a month, I'll do some coke if someone offers it at a party.

Therapist: Has anyone else expressed concern about your substance use?

Patient: My sister mentioned something last month when I showed up late to my nephew's birthday. She could tell I was hungover. And my roommate made a comment about all the empty beer cans in our recycling. I brushed it off as a joke, but I could tell he was concerned.

Therapist: Have you ever tried to cut down or stop using alcohol or other substances?

Patient: I've tried a few times. Last January I did a "dry month" but only made it about two weeks. By the third weekend, I convinced myself I deserved a reward for making it that far. I've deleted the food delivery apps from my phone a few times because it makes it too easy to order beer when I'm already tipsy. But I always end up reinstalling them.

Therapist: Have you experienced any withdrawal symptoms when you try to cut back?

Patient: I get really irritable. And I have trouble sleeping - like, I'll lie awake for hours or wake up at 3 AM and not be able to get back to sleep. Sometimes my hands get a bit shaky the day after heavy drinking if I don't have a drink to "take the edge off."

Therapist: Have you noticed any impacts on your physical health?

Patient: My digestive system is a mess. I get acid reflux all the time now. And I've gained about 15 pounds in the last year, which I'm pretty sure is related to all the alcohol calories and late-night food orders. My workouts are less effective too - I keep skipping the gym when I'm hungover.

Therapist: What about impacts on your responsibilities at work or home?

Patient: There have been a few Monday mornings where I've called in sick because I was too hungover to function after a weekend of partying. And I've definitely been less productive overall. At home, I've been letting chores pile up. My apartment is a mess, and I keep ordering takeout instead of cooking.

Therapist: Have you ever found yourself in dangerous situations due to substance use?

Patient: I took an Uber home a few months ago and realized the next morning that I'd left my credit card at the bar. And there was a night last summer when I apparently tried to walk home from downtown and got lost - a friend found me wandering in the wrong direction. I don't actually remember much of that night. And I'm ashamed to admit it, but I've driven when I probably shouldn't have, thinking I was "fine" when I definitely wasn't.

Therapist: How do you typically feel when you're not using substances?

Patient: Honestly? Bored. Anxious. Like I'm missing something. Social events seem less fun, and it's harder to relax after work. Sometimes I'll sit there thinking about having a drink, and it's hard to focus on anything else until I do.

Therapist: It sounds like you're noticing some significant impacts. What would you like to change about your current substance use?

Patient: I don't know if I need to quit completely, but I definitely need more control. I'd like to be able to have just one or two drinks and stop. I want to be more reliable for the people in my life. And I'm worried about where this is heading if I don't make changes soon.

Therapist: Those are important insights. Let's talk about some strategies and resources that might help you work toward those goals...